V0.26 tenant tokens (#1446)
meilisearch/documentation: learn/security/tenant_tokens.md

`apiKeyPrefix` must be the first 8 characters of a valid Meilisearch API key.

`exp` is the only optional parameter of a tenant token. It must be a UNIX timestamp specifying the expiration date of the token.

For more information on each one of the tenant token fields, consult the [token payload reference](#tenant-token-payload-reference).

The `tokenPayload` is passed to `node-jsonwebtoken`'s `sign` method, together with the complete API key used in the payload and the chosen encryption algorithm. Meilisearch supports the following encryption algorithms: `HS256`, `HS384`, and `HS512`.

Though this example used `node-jsonwebtoken`, a NodeJS package, you may use any JWT-compatible library in whatever language you feel comfortable.

After signing the token, you can use it to make search queries in the same way you would use an API key.

<CodeSamples id="tenant_token_guide_search_no_sdk_1" />

::: note
The `curl` example presented here is only for illustration purposes. In production environments, you would likely send the token to the front-end of your application and query indexes from there.
:::

> ### Generating a tenant token with from scratch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Generating a tenant token from scratch
```

Generating tenant tokens without a library is possible, but requires considerably more effort.

Though creating a JWT from scratch is out of scope for this guide, here's a quick summary of the necessary steps.

The full process requires you to create a token header, prepare the data payload with at least one set of search rules, and then sign the token with an API key.

The token header must specify a `JWT` type and an encryption algorithm. Supported tenant token encryption algorithms are `HS256`, `HS384`, and `HS512`.

```json
{
  "alg": "HS256",
  "typ": "JWT"
} 
```

The token payload contains most of the relevant token data. It must be an object containing a set of search rules and the first 8 characters of Meilisearch API key. You may optionally set an expiration date for your token. Consult the [token payload reference](#tenant-token-payload-reference) for more information.

```json
{
  "exp": 1646756934,
  "apiKeyPrefix": "12345678",
  "searchRules": {
  "patient_medical_records": {
    "filter": "user_id = 1"
  }

> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   }
}
```

To use tokens in Meilisearch, you only need to have a system for token generation in place. The quickest method to generate tenant tokens is [using one of our official SDKs](#generating-tenant-tokens-with-an-sdk). It is also possible to [generate a token from scratch](#generating-tenant-tokens-without-a-meilisearch-sdk).

Tenant tokens do not require you to configure any specific [instance options](/learn/configuration/instance_options.md) or [index settings](/learn/configuration/settings.md). They are also meant to be short-lived—Meilisearch does not store nor keeps track of generated tokens.

## Generating tenant tokens with an SDK

Imagine that you are developing an application that allows patients and doctors to search through medical records. In your application, it is crucial that each patient can see only their own records and not those of another patient.

The code in this example imports the SDK, creates a filter based on the current user's ID, and feeds that data into the SDK's `generateTenantToken` function. Once the token is generated, it is stored in the `token` variable:

<CodeSamples id="tenant_token_guide_generate_sdk_1" />

> There are three important parameters to keep in mind when using an SDK to generate a tenant token: **search rules**, **API key**, and **expiration date**. Together,  they make the token's payload.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are three important parameters to keep in mind when using an SDK to generate a tenant token: **search rules**, **API key**, and **expiration date**. Together, they make the token's payload.
```

I removed a white space in the last part of the last sentence (its hard to see)

**Search rules** must be a JSON object specifying the restrictions that will be applied to search requests on a given index. It must contain at least one search rule. [To learn more about search rules, take a look at our tenant token payload reference.](#search-rules)

As its name indicates, **API key** must be a valid Meilisearch API key. A tenant token will have access to the same indexes as the API key used when generating it. If no API key is provided, the SDK might be able to infer it automatically.

**Expiration date** is optional when using an SDK. Tokens become invalid after their expiration date. Tokens without an expiration date will expire when their parent API key does.

You can read more about each element of a tenant token payload in [this guide's final section](#tenant-token-payload-reference).

### Using a tenant token with an SDK

> After creating a token, you can sent it back to the front-end. There, you can use it to make queries that will only return results whose `user_id` attribute equals the current user's ID:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After creating a token, you can send it back to the front-end. There, you can use it to make queries that will only return results whose `user_id` attribute equals the current user's ID:
```

<CodeSamples id="tenant_token_guide_search_sdk_1" />

Applications may use tenant tokens and API keys interchangeably when searching. For example, the same application might use a default search API key for queries on public indexes and a tenant token for logged-in users searching on private data.

## Generating tenant tokens without a Meilisearch SDK

> Though Meilisearch recommends [using an official SDK to generate tenant tokens](#generating-tenant-tokens-with-an-sdk), this is not a requirement. Since tenant tokens follow the [JWT standard](https://jwt.io), you can use a number of [compatible third-party libraries](https://jwt.io/libraries). You may also skip all assistance and generate a token from scratch, though this is probably unnecessary in most production environments.

Reviewer 2: 🔥

If you are already familiar with the creation of JWTs and only want to know about the specific requirements of a tenant token payload, skip this section and take a look at the [token payload reference](#tenant-token-payload-reference).

### Generating a tenant token with a third-party library

Using a third-party library for tenant token generation is fairly similar to creating tokens with an official SDK. The following example uses the [`node-jsonwebtoken`](https://github.com/auth0/node-jsonwebtoken) library:

```js
const jwt = require('jsonwebtoken');

const apiKey = 'my_api_key';
const currentUserID = 'a_user_id';

const tokenPayload = {
  searchRules: {
    'patient_medical_records': {
      'filter': `user_id = ${currentUserID}`
     }
  },
  apiKeyPrefix: apiKey.substring(0, 8),
  exp: parseInt(Date.now() / 1000) + 20 * 60 // 20 minutes
};

> const token = jwt.sign(tokenPayload, apiKey, {algorithm: 'HS256'});

Reviewer 2: Very cool example 👌. If you want to shorten it, by default `jsonwebtoken` uses `HS256` as default algorithm :) But it is oke to leave it for clarity if you prefer

Author: Yeah, I was about to do that, based on the samples you sent over slack, but I realised it was useful to keep it. That option gives me a good hook to list the encryption algorithms Meilisearch supports.

Reviewer 2: I agree !

Though this example used `node-jsonwebtoken`, a NodeJS package, you may use any JWT-compatible library in whatever language you feel comfortable.

After signing the token, you can use it to make search queries in the same way you would use an API key.

<CodeSamples id="tenant_token_guide_search_no_sdk_1" />

::: note
The `curl` example presented here is only for illustration purposes. In production environments, you would likely send the token to the front-end of your application and query indexes from there.
:::

### Generating a tenant token from scratch

Generating tenant tokens without a library is possible, but requires considerably more effort.

Though creating a JWT from scratch is out of scope for this guide, here's a quick summary of the necessary steps.

The full process requires you to create a token header, prepare the data payload with at least one set of search rules, and then sign the token with an API key.

The token header must specify a `JWT` type and an encryption algorithm. Supported tenant token encryption algorithms are `HS256`, `HS384`, and `HS512`.

```json
{
  "alg": "HS256",
  "typ": "JWT"
} 
```

> The token payload contains most of the relevant token data. It must be an object containing a set of search rules and the first 8 characters of Meilisearch API key. You may optionally set an expiration date for your token. Consult the [token payload reference](#tenant-token-payload-reference) for more information on how the requirements for each payload field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The token payload contains most of the relevant token data. It must be an object containing a set of search rules and the first 8 characters of a Meilisearch API key. You may optionally set an expiration date for your token. Consult the [token payload reference](#tenant-token-payload-reference) for more information on how the requirements for each payload field.
```

> The token payload contains most of the relevant token data. It must be an object containing a set of search rules and the first 8 characters of a Meilisearch API key. You may optionally set an expiration date for your token. Consult the [token payload reference](#tenant-token-payload-reference) for more information on how the requirements for each payload field.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The token payload contains most of the relevant token data. It must be an object containing a set of search rules and the first 8 characters of a Meilisearch API key. You may optionally set an expiration date for your token. Consult the [token payload reference](#tenant-token-payload-reference) for more information on the requirements for each payload field.
```

In this example, all queries across all indexes will only return documents whose `user_id` equals `1`:

```json
{
  "*": {
    "filter": "user_id = 1"
  }
}
```

The next rule goes a bit further. When searching on the `patient_medical_records` index, a user can only see records that belong to them and have been marked as published:

```json
{
  "patient_medical_records": {
    "filter": "user_id = 1 AND published = true"
  }
}
```

A token may contain rules for any number of indexes. **Specific rulesets take precedence and overwrite `*` rules.**

The previous rules can be combined in one tenant token:

```json
{
  "apiKeyPrefix": "rkDxFUHd",
  "exp": 1641835850,
  "searchRules": {
    "*": {
      "filter": "user_id = 1"
    },
    "medical_records": {
      "filter": "user_id = 1 AND published = true",
    }
  }
}
```

::: danger
Because tenant tokens are generated in your application, Meilisearch cannot check if search rule filters are valid. Invalid search rules will only throw errors when they are used in a query.

Consult the search API reference for [more information on Meilisearch filter syntax](/reference/api/search.md#filter).
:::

> ### API Keys

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### API Key
```

# Multitenancy and tenant tokens

> In this guide you'll first learn [what multitenancy is](#what-is-multitenancy) and [how tenant tokens help managing complex applications and sensitive data](#what-are-tenant-tokens-and-how-do-they-solve-multitenancy-in-meilisearch). Then, you'll see [how to generate and use tokens](#generating-tenant-tokens-with-an-sdk), whether with an official SDK or [otherwise](#generating-tenant-tokens-without-a-meilisearch-sdk). The guide ends with a quick explanation of [the main tenant token settings](#tenant-token-payload-reference).

Author: @maryamsulemani97 had similar thoughts on the links here. Will remove them.

re: warning—sure, makes sense.

## What is multitenancy?

> In software development, multitenancy means that multiple users with different interests—also called tenants—share the same computing resources. Proper multitenancy is crucial in cloud computing services such as [Digital Ocean's Droplets](https://www.digitalocean.com/products/droplets) and [Amazon's AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/).

Reviewer 4: This explanation could be focused on the concept of multi-tenancy within Meilisearch or a database.

Something that might help: 

Single-tenant model: A Meilisearch index stores data for a single tenant.
Multi-tenant model: A Meilisearch index stores data for multiple tenants.

> In software development, multitenancy means that multiple users with different interests—also called tenants—share the same computing resources. Proper multitenancy is crucial in cloud computing services such as [Digital Ocean's Droplets](https://www.digitalocean.com/products/droplets) and [Amazon's AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In software development, multitenancy means that multiple users with different interests—also called tenants—share the same computing resources. Proper multitenancy is crucial in cloud computing services such as [DigitalOcean's Droplets](https://www.digitalocean.com/products/droplets) and [Amazon's AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/).
```

> If your Meilisearch application stores sensitive data like medical records in the same index, it is very important to make sure users can only search through their own documents.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If your Meilisearch application stores sensitive data belonging to multiple users in the same index, it is very important to make sure users can only search through their own documents. This can be accomplished with **tenant tokens**.
```

Tenant tokens do not require you to configure any specific [instance options](/learn/configuration/instance_options.md) or [index settings](/learn/configuration/settings.md). They are also meant to be short-lived—Meilisearch does not store nor keeps track of generated tokens.

## Generating tenant tokens with an SDK

If you are developing an application that allows patients to search through medical records, it is crucial that each user can only see their own records and not anyone else's.

The code in this example imports the SDK, creates a filter based on the current user's ID, and feeds that data into the SDK's `generateTenantToken` function. Once the token is generated, it is stored in the `token` variable:

```js
// placeholder code sample. Final version will be supplied by the integrations team
// <CodeSamples id="tenant_token_guide_generate_sdk_1">
const client = new Meilisearch({host: 'meilisearch'});

const apiKey = '[an_api_key]';
const currentUserID = '[placeholder_user_id]';

const searchRules = {
  'patient_medical_records': {
    'filter': `user_id = ${currentUserID}`
  }
};

const expiryDate = 1645461882;

> const token = client.generateTenantToken(searchRules, expiryDate, apiKey);

Reviewer 2: The code sample will look like this: 

```js
const client = new Meilisearch({ host: 'meilisearch' });

const apiKey = '[an_api_key]';
const currentUserID = '[placeholder_user_id]';
const expiresAt = new Date('2030-04-01');
const searchRules = {
  'patient_medical_records': {
    'filter': `user_id = ${currentUserID}`
   }
};

const token = client.generateTenantToken(searchRules, {
   expiresAt: expiresAt,
   apiKey: apiKey,
});
```

Author: Looks great. Only one comment: we have been moving away from marking placeholder values with `[]` (e.g. `[an_api_key]`). @dichotommy, @maryamsulemani97 do you think we should also enforce this in SDK examples?

Reviewer 2: I think removing `[]` is a good idea as well :) It is a bit confusing. If so should I replace it with `an_api_key` ? (same for user_id)

Author: Ok, cool, so let's go with that, then: placeholder values without `[]`. You probably don't need to update it here, as I'm going to replace the hardcoded sample with a `<CodeSample>` component soon.

Thanks!

```

There are three things you should pay attention to when using an SDK to generate a tenant token. In the above example, they are stored in `searchRules`, `apiKey`, and `expiryDate`.

> `searchRules` must be an object containing at least one search rule. A search rule must specify either an index name or a `*` wildcard. Search rules must also declare at least one filter. In this example, the filter makes it so a user only has access to their own records.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about this, unless I did not understand the sentence but these are valid and non valid formats of searchRules: 

✅
```
searchRules: ["*"]
```

❌
```
searchRules: "*"
```
✅
```
searchRules: {}
```

✅
```
searchRules: {
    movies: {}
}
```

✅
```
searchRules: {
    movies: null
}
```

✅
```
searchRules: {
    movies: {
       filters: "id = 1"
    }
}
```

Author: I believe the confusion should at least be partly cleared with @dichotommy's suggestion. 

Do let me know otherwise.

`apiKey` must be a valid Meilisearch API key. A tenant token will have access to the same indexes as the API key you use when generating it. If no API key is provided, the SDK might be able to infer it automatically.

> `expiryDate` is optional when using an SDK. If used, this parameter must be a UNIX timestamp. Tokens becomes invalid after their `expiryDate`.

Reviewer 2: in the SDK`s we use `expiresAt` and it is an [`Date` instance](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date)

Author: Thanks! I'm removing direct references to variables to reduce coupling between SDK code samples and the text. I'm also removing the bit stating what this parameter expects. Seems safer since we can't assume every language will have a `Date`-equivalent with that exact name.

You can read more about each of element of the tenant token payload in [this guide's final section](#tenant-token-payload-reference).

### Using a tenant token with an SDK

The resulting token, stored on the `token` variable, can then be sent back to the front-end and used to make queries that will only return results whose `user_id` attribute equals the current user's ID:

```js
// placeholder code sample. Final version will be supplied by the integrations team
// <CodeSamples id="tenant_token_guide_sdk_search_1">
const frontEndClient = new Meilisearch({
  apiKey: token
});

const medicalRecordsIndex = frontEndClient.index('patient_medical_records');

> const search = medicalRecordsIndex.search('blood test');

Reviewer 2: ```js
const frontEndClient = new Meilisearch({
  host: "http://localhost:7700", // or mywebsite.com ?
  apiKey: token
});

const search = await frontEndClient
    .index('patient_medical_records')
    .search('blood test');
```

## Generating tenant tokens without a Meilisearch SDK

Though [Meilisearch recommends using an official SDK](#generating-tenant-tokens-with-an-sdk), this is not a requirement. Since tenant tokens follow the [JWT standard](https://jwt.io), you can use a number of [compatible third-party helper libraries](https://jwt.io/libraries). You may also skip all assistance and generate a token from scratch.

The full process requires you to [create a token header](#step-1-creating-a-token-header), [prepare a data payload](#step-2-preparing-the-token-payload) with at least one set of search rules, and then [sign the token](#step-3-signing-a-token) with an API key.

If you are already familiar with the creation of JWTs and only want to know about the specific requirements of a tenant token payload, take a look at this guide's [token payload reference](#tenant-token-payload-reference).

::: note
The following examples use JavaScript for the sake of simplicity, but Meilisearch should be compatible with the majority of modern stacks and languages.
:::

> ### Step 1: Creating a token header

Reviewer 2: I know this might be late into the party but I would very much suggest you make an example using the [jsonwebtoken](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jsonwebtoken) library. 
Apart from the SDK's it's very very rare to create a JWT from scratch. I could barely find documentation online. 
Most of guides, [google's guide as well](https://cloud.google.com/iot/docs/how-tos/credentials/jwts), makes the example using that library!

The first step when generating a tenant token is to create a header stating token type and the chosen encryption algorithm. Once that is done you must encode the header object into `base64`:

```js
let header = {
  "alg": "HS256",
  "typ": "JWT"
}

> const base64Header = base64Encode(header);

Reviewer 2: This function does not exists, the user has to use the `Buffer` API. 

```js
function encode64(str: any) {
  return Buffer.from(JSON.stringify(str)).toString('base64')
}
```

Reviewer 4: Thanks, @bidoubiwa! I think this is the pseudo-code used in the specification that was presented here. I will update the specification when the js method is validated by someone from the @meilisearch/integration-team. 💪

Reviewer 2: Here you go: https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch-js/blob/e7b9c83ad6feb6044c76c8d71bf51372b2dbf34f/src/lib/token.ts

```

The encryption algorithm indicated by `alg` can be one of: `HS256`, `HS384`, or `HS512`. The choice of algorithm has no impact in tenant token behavior.

Meilisearch only supports JWT tokens and `typ` must always be `JWT`.

### Step 2: Preparing the token payload

Once the header is ready, you must create a payload. In this case, payload means the data containing the token's API key prefix, search rules, and optional expiry date.

First, you must extract the first eight characters from a valid API key with access to the search endpoint:

```js
const meiliSearchApikey = '[an_api_key]';
const yourApiKeyPrefix = meiliSearchApiKey.slice(0,8);
```

`apiKey` must be a valid Meilisearch API key. A tenant token will have access to the same indexes as the API key you use when generating it. When generating a tenant token payload, you should only supply the first 8 characters of a key.

Your payload must also contain a `searchRules` object. The following example would force all searches made with the token to only return results with a `user_id` of `1`:

```js
const yourSearchRules = {
  "patient_medical_records": {
    "filter": "user_id = 1"
  }
}
```

> `searchRules` must be an object containing at least one search rule. A search rule must specify either an index name or a `*` wildcard. Search rules must also declare at least one filter. In this example, the filter makes it so a user only has access to their own records.

Author: Same as above—we're on the no SDK section of the guide and I don't think we should take as a given that people would read both sections. 

I dislike content duplication as well, though. Only alternative I see to this is to start the guide with the full payload reference.

With both these steps completed, you are ready to generate the token payload:

```js
const payload = {
  "apiKeyPrefix": yourApiKeyPrefix,
  "exp": 1641835850,
  "searchRules": yourSearchRules
}
```

You can also optionally set an expiry date for your token. Tokens are invalid once past their expiry date.

Like the header, it is necessary to encode the payload:

```js
const base64Payload = base64Encode(payload);

> ```

Reviewer 2: Same as above:
```
function encode64(str: any) {
  return Buffer.from(JSON.stringify(str)).toString('base64')
}
```

Reviewer 2: the name of my variable is horrible, it should be 
```js
function encore64(data) {
  return Buffer.from(JSON.stringify(data)).toString('base64')
}
```

Then this function `JSON.stringify(data)` hidden in the middle, is transforming any data into a string (if it is a valid JSON but there is no reason why the user would use a non valid one, in which case it will throw an error).

You can read more about each of element of the tenant token payload in [this guide's final section](#tenant-token-payload-reference).

### Step 3: Signing a token

Tokens following the JWT standard must be signed. The signature is created by concatenating the encoded header and payload using a `.` as the separator, then encrypting the resulting string. **The encryption key must be the same you used when generating the payload's API key prefix.**

```js
const signature = HS256(base64Header + '.' + base64Payload, meiliSearchApiKey);

> ```

Reviewer 2: This function does not exists, user will have to import the crypto standard library in Node 
```js
import crypto from 'crypto'
```

and then create the hash the following way: 
```js
return crypto
    .createHmac('sha256', apiKey)
    .update(`${encodedHeader}.${encodedPayload}`)
    .digest('base64')
    .replace(/\+/g, '-')
    .replace(/\//g, '_')
    .replace(/=/g, '')
```

This example uses an HS256 encryption algorithm. **The encryption algorithm you use must be the same as the one indicated in the token's header.**

The remaining step is putting it all together. Concatenate the header, payload, and signature using a `.` to separate each element of the token:

```js
const yourTenantToken = base64Header + '.' + base64Payload + '.' + signature;
```

### Using a tenant token without an SDK

Your token is ready. Tenant tokens can seamlessly replace any requests made to the search endpoint:

> <CodeSamples id="tenant_token_guide_search_no_sdk_1" />

Reviewer 2: Is this a cURL code sample?

Author: Yes. L#660 on `.code-samples.meilisearch.yaml`

::: note
The `curl` example presented here is only for illustration purposes. In production environments, you would likely send the token to the front-end of your application and query indexes from there.
:::

## Tenant token payload reference

Meilisearch's tenant tokens are JWTs. Their payload is made of three elements: [search rules](#search-rules), an [API key](#api-keys), and an optional [expiration date](#expiry-date).

### Search rules

Search rules are a set of instructions defining search parameters that will be enforced in every query made with a specific tenant token.

`searchRules` must contain a JSON object specifying rules that will be enforced on any queries using this token. Each rule is itself a JSON object and must follow this pattern:

```json
{
 "[index_name]": {
   "[search_parameter]": "[value]"
 }
}
```

> The object key must be an index name. You may also use `*` instead of a specific index name—in this case, search rules will be applied to all indexes.

Reviewer: Maybe mention that * is a wildcard here because you mention overwriting wildcard rules in line 213? It maybe very obvious to some people, so Idk if its necessary

> The object value must consist of `search_parameter:value` pairs. Currently, **tenant tokens only supports the `filter` [search parameter](/reference/api/search.md#filter)**.

Reviewer 4: Love this whole section. ✨

Reviewer 5: I agree with guigui ze pmeuh 💪

> The object value must consist of `search_parameter:value` pairs. Currently, **tenant tokens only supports the `filter` [search parameter](/reference/api/search.md#filter)**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The object value must consist of `search_parameter:value` pairs. Currently, **tenant tokens only support the `filter` [search parameter](/reference/api/search.md#filter)**.
```

Author: I was cringing very hard when I woke up today and immediately noticed this. I should stop pushing commits at the end of the day.

> The following search rule forces every query across all accessible indexes to only return results whose `user_id` equals `1`:

Reviewer 3: This sentence though 👀 🧠 💢

Author: Can you expand a bit on this? I believe you mean it's too complex? I think I agree with that, but want to be sure I understood what you meant.

```json
{
  "*": {
    "filter": "user_id = 1"
  }
}
```

> The next rule goes a bit further. When searching on the `patient_medical_records` index, a user can only see records that belong to them and have been marked as published:

Reviewer 3: I want very badly to change `further` to `farther` here but have no idea why, forcing me to confront the inescapable subjectivity of all of my suggestions 🙆🏻 so, thanks for that

Author: I think they're interchangeable in this case, no? I'm going to leave it as is and see how long before you make a PR changing it.

```json
{
  "patient_medical_records": {
    "filter": "user_id = 1 AND published = true"
  }
}
```

A token may contain rules for any number of indexes. **Specific rulesets take precedence and overwrite wildcard rules.**

The previous rules can be combined in one tenant token:

```json
{
  "apiKeyPrefix": "rkDxFUHd",
  "exp": 1641835850,
  "searchRules": {
    "*": {
      "filter": "user_id = 1"
    },
    "medical_records": {
      "filter": "user_id = 1 AND published = true",
    }
  }
}
```

In [the previous SDK example](#generating-tenant-tokens-with-an-sdk), the search rules are stored in `searchRules`:

```js
// placeholder code sample. Final version will be supplied by the integrations team
// <CodeSamples id="tenant_token_guide_fragment_rules_1">
const searchRules = {
  'patient_medical_records': {
    'filter': `user_id = ${currentUserID}`
  }
};

> const token = client.generateTenantToken(searchRules, expiryDate, apiKey);

Reviewer 2: ```js
const searchRules = {
  'patient_medical_records': {
    'filter': `user_id = ${currentUserID}`
  }
};
const token = client.generateTenantToken(searchRules);
```

This works as the `apiKey` is optional. See the comment below!

```

::: danger
Because tenant tokens are generated in your application, Meilisearch cannot check if search rule filters are valid. Invalid search rules will only throw errors when they are used in a query.

> Consult the search API reference [more information on Meilisearch filter syntax](/reference/api/search.md#filter).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consult the search API reference for [more information on Meilisearch filter syntax](/reference/api/search.md#filter).
```

:::

### API Keys

Creating a token requires an API key. A token has access to the same indexes as the API key used to generate it.

Since a master key is not an API key, **you cannot use a master key to create a tenant token**.

For security reasons, we strongly recommend you avoid exposing the API key whenever possible and **always generate tokens on your application's back-end**.

When using an official Meilisearch SDK, you may indicate which API key you wish to use when generating a token. Consult the documentation of the SDK you are using for more specific instructions.

In [the previous SDK example](#generating-tenant-tokens-with-an-sdk), the API key is stored in `apiKey`:

```js
// placeholder code sample. Final version will be supplied by the integrations team
// <CodeSamples id="tenant_token_guide_fragment_key_1">
const apiKey = '[an_api_key]';

> const token = client.generateTenantToken(searchRules, expiryDate, apiKey);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const token = client.generateTenantToken(searchRules, { apiKey });
```

ApiKey is actually optional because the apiKey provided by the client `client` can also be used. 
This works: 

```js
const client = new MeiliSearch({ host: "...", apiKey: "1234567" })

const token = client.generateToken(["*])
```
In this case it will use the `apiKey` of the `client`

```

::: note

> If an API key expires, any token tenants created with it will become invalid. The same applies if the API key is deleted or regenerated due to a changed master key.

Reviewer: Did you use "token tenants" on purpose here?
```suggestion
If an API key expires, any tenant tokens created with it will become invalid. The same applies if the API key is deleted or regenerated due to a changed master key.
```

:::

[You can read more about API keys in our dedicated guide.](/learn/security/master_api_keys.md)

### Expiry date

It is possible to define an expiry date when generating a token. This is good security practice and Meilisearch recommends setting relatively short token expiry dates whenever possible.

The expiry date must be a UNIX timestamp or `null`. Additionally, a token's expiration date cannot exceed its parent API key's expiration date. For example, if an API key is set to expire on 2022-10-15, a token generated with that API key cannot be set to expire on 2022-10-16.

> Setting a token expiry date is optional, but recommended. Tokens without an expiry date are never expire and can be used indefinitely as long as its parent API key remains valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting a token expiry date is optional, but recommended. Tokens without an expiry date never expire and can be used indefinitely as long as the parent API key remains valid.
```

> Setting a token expiry date is optional, but recommended. Tokens without an expiry date are never expire and can be used indefinitely as long as its parent API key remains valid.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Setting a token expiry date is optional, but recommended. A token without an expiry date never expires and can be used indefinitely as long as its parent API key remains valid.
```

::: danger
The only way to revoke a token without an expiry date is to [delete](/reference/api/keys.md#delete-a-key) its parent API key.

Changing an instance's master key forces Meilisearch to regenerate all API keys and will also render all existing tenant tokens invalid.
:::

When using an official Meilisearch SDK, you may indicate the expiry date when generating a token. Consult the documentation of the SDK you are using for more specific instructions.

In [the previous SDK example](#generating-tenant-tokens-with-an-sdk), the expiry date is stored in `expiryDate`:

> ```js

Reviewer 3: Not sure where to put this comment, but I am wondering if these three "code sample fragments" are really helpful. I think I understand the value of having a visual/code aid in this reference section, but aren't the payload elements/method arguments being discussed pretty SDK-agnostic? I imagine that it would be enough to show an example value for each payload element in a simple triple-backtick code block.

Then again, maybe there's some value I'm not considering, such as making it easy for users of typed languages to see the recommended data type for each argument. But even then, it's nothing that wouldn't be included in "tenant_token_guide_generate_sdk_1" above. So I'm inclined to replace these with inline code blocks rather than trouble the integrations team unnecessarily. WDYT?

Author: I understand what you mean, but it felt more user-friendly to have the SDK options here too. Especially in the case a user has already chosen an SDK (and thus explicitly named the language in which they want to see code samples), so it can be annoying/make understanding the sample a tiny bit harder if I'm e.g. a Rust dev and suddenly see some JS.

Also, and this might be more important, different SDKs have slightly different signatures (I believe JS accepts one search rules object and another for `exp` and `apiKey`, whilst Ruby accepts three separate arguments for the same values).

// placeholder code sample. Final version will be supplied by the integrations team
// <CodeSamples id="tenant_token_guide_fragment_expiry_1">
const expiryDate = 1645461882;

> const token = client.generateTenantToken(searchRules, expiryDate, apiKey);

Reviewer 2: ```js
const expiresAt = new Date('2030-04-01');

const token = client.generateTenantToken(searchRules, { expiresAt: expiresAt );
```

# Tenant tokens

> In this guide you'll first learn [what multitenancy is](#what-is-multitenancy) and [how tenant tokens help managing complex applications and sensitive data](#what-are-tenant-tokens-and-how-do-they-solve-multitenancy-in-meilisearch). Then, you'll see [how to generate and use tokens](#generating-tenant-tokens-with-an-sdk), whether with an official SDK or [otherwise](#generating-tenant-tokens-without-a-meilisearch-sdk). The guide ends with a quick explanation of [the main tenant token settings](#tenant-token-settings).

Author: Well, the idea was born out of having an intro paragraph that also offers minor navigation capabilities to each section in the guide. Not sure it works, though.

Why do you think that too many links is not a good idea?

> In this guide you'll first learn [what multitenancy is](#what-is-multitenancy) and [how tenant tokens help managing complex applications and sensitive data](#what-are-tenant-tokens-and-how-do-they-solve-multitenancy-in-meilisearch). Then, you'll see [how to generate and use tokens](#generating-tenant-tokens-with-an-sdk), whether with an official SDK or [otherwise](#generating-tenant-tokens-without-a-meilisearch-sdk). The guide ends with a quick explanation of [the main tenant token settings](#tenant-token-settings).

Reviewer: Dk if it's just me but when I see a bunch of links in a sentence like this, I just have to open each one individually and skim through it 🤡. But if I see the same content listed as bullets, I just move on as I will eventually see it later on the page.

## What is multitenancy?

In software development, multitenancy means that multiple users with different interests—also called tenants—share the same computing resources. Despite existing in the same environment, tenants are not aware of one another and do not have access to each other's data. Proper multitenancy is crucial in cloud computing services such as [Digital Ocean's Droplets](https://www.digitalocean.com/products/droplets) and [Amazon's AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/).

Depending on the type of application you are developing with Meilisearch, it is possible you will face similar challenges. For example, if your application handles sensitive data like medical records, it is very important to make sure users can only search through their own documents.

> ### What are tenant tokens and how do they solve multitenancy in Meilisearch?

Author: Hmmm…interesting idea. I hadn't considered it, but I guess you're right some users might assume tokens are somehow stored by Meilisearch.

The resulting token, stored on the `token` variable, can then be sent back to the front-end and used to make queries that will only return results whose `user_id` attribute equals the current user's ID:

```js
// placeholder code sample. Final version will be supplied by the integrations team
// <CodeSamples id="tenant_token_guide_sdk_search_1">
const frontEndClient = new Meilisearch({
  apiKey: token
});

const medicalRecordsIndex = frontEndClient.index('patient_medical_records');
const search = medicalRecordsIndex.search('blood test');
```

Applications may use tenant tokens and API keys interchangeably when searching. For example, the same application might use a default search API key for queries on public indexes and a tenant token for logged-in users searching on private data.

## Generating tenant tokens without a Meilisearch SDK

Though [Meilisearch recommends using an official SDK](#generating-tenant-tokens-with-an-sdk), this is not a requirement. Since tenant tokens follow the JWT standard, you can use a number of [compatible third-party helper libraries](https://jwt.io/libraries). You may also skip all assistance and generate a token from scratch.

> The full process requires you to [create a token header](#creating-a-token-header), [prepare a data payload](#preparing-the-token-payload) with at least one set of search rules, and then [sign the token](#signing-a-token) with an API key.

Author: The structure I chose was dictated by two main ideas:

- show users some code as soon as possible;
- be as usage-agnostic and beginner-friendly as possible.

These two choices mean that the hardcore data part of the guide (the one containing exhaustive descriptions of the payload) gets pushed to the bottom of the page, under "Tenant token settings." 

Do you think more and clearer links to the last section of this document, `## Tenant token settings` could help?

> The full process requires you to [create a token header](#creating-a-token-header), [prepare a data payload](#preparing-the-token-payload) with at least one set of search rules, and then [sign the token](#signing-a-token) with an API key.

Reviewer 6: Yes, I think this could help! My point is more related to the idea of "explaining how to build a JWT is really necessary?". No problem if you think otherwise, just raising the hand about that! :D

> The full process requires you to [create a token header](#creating-a-token-header), [prepare a data payload](#preparing-the-token-payload) with at least one set of search rules, and then [sign the token](#signing-a-token) with an API key.

Author: Ah, sorry, I misunderstood the first part!

In the @meilisearch/docs-team we tend to prioritise helping less experienced programmers, so there's always the possibility we become too didactic. One of my references for this guide was [Google's IoT token guide](https://cloud.google.com/iot/docs/how-tos/credentials/jwts#iot-core-jwt-nodejs), which does go over token creation, though.

I'll try to get a few more opinions before making a decision. Thanks for raising this point!

::: note
The following examples use javascript for the sake of simplicity, but Meilisearch should be compatible with the majority of modern stacks and languages.
:::

### Creating a token header

The first step when generating a tenant token is to create a header stating token type and the chosen encryption algorithm. Once that is done you must encode the header object into `base64`:

```js
let header = {
  "alg": "HS256",
  "typ": "JWT"
}

const base64Header = base64Encode(header);
```

The encryption algorithm indicated by `alg` can be one of: `HS256`, `HS384`, or `HS512`. The choice of algorithm has no impact in tenant token behavior.

Meilisearch only supports JWT tokens and `typ` must always be `JWT`.

### Preparing the token payload

Once the header is ready, you must create a payload. In this case, payload means the data containing the token's API key prefix, search rules, and optional expiry date.

> First, you must extract the first eight characters from a valid API key with access to the search endpoint:

Reviewer: Idk if this is super important, but do we need to mention that the `apiKeyPrefix` can't be generated from a master key?

<CodeSamples id="tenant_token_guide_search_no_sdk_1" />

::: note
The `curl` example presented here is only for illustration purposes. In production environments, you would likely send the token to the front-end of your application and query indexes from there.
:::

## Tenant token settings

### Search rules

Search rules are a set of instructions defining search parameters that will be enforced in every query made with a specific tenant token.

`searchRules` must contain a JSON object specifying rules that will be enforced on any queries using this token. Each rule is itself a JSON object and must follow this pattern:

```json
{
 "[index_name]": {
   "[search_parameter]": "[value]"
 }
}
```

The object key must be an index name. Its value must consist of any number of `key:value` pairs. The `key` must be a [search parameter](/reference/api/search.md#search-parameters) and the value must be a valid argument for that parameter.

This example rule declares that every search made in the `patient_medical_records` index must return results chronologically sorted results:

```json
{
  "patient_medical_records": {
    "sort": "date:desc"
  }
}
```

> Search rules can combine any number of search parameters. This rule requires all results to be sorted chronologically and excludes documents not belonging to belonging to a specific user:

Author: I thought that the search rule errors were the same as regular search parameter errors. E.g., a search rule with an invalid value for the `filter` parameter would return an invalid filter error and so forth.

Is that not the case?

> Search rules can combine any number of search parameters. This rule requires all results to be sorted chronologically and excludes documents not belonging to belonging to a specific user:

Reviewer 6: Unfortunately, if the user sets a bad filter like `"filter": "is_admin_user == true"` (should have only one `=` sign) the error will only be found when the user tries to use this token with the search method.

What I mean is, this error is not felt during the token generation but only in the usage of the generated token.

> Search rules can combine any number of search parameters. This rule requires all results to be sorted chronologically and excludes documents not belonging to belonging to a specific user:

Author: Ok, got it. Thanks!
